Don revie's name is rarely mentioned
today in a 13 year period he elevated
Leeds United from being a small
provincial and gown on its luck Club to
being one of the finest in Europe he won
six major trophies and his
accomplishments stand alongside those of
contemporaries like Bill Shankly and
Brian Clough a complex and textured man
though history hasn't rewarded him in
nearly the same way really first arrived
at Leeds United in the winter of 1958 as
an ageing and slowing forward who cost
14,000 pounds from Sunderland his best
playing days were behind him just three
years before he'd been voted the FWA
Footballer of the year and won the last
of his six caps for England the year
after that he'd won the FA Cup with
Manchester City but he moved to Elland
Road following to desperately
disappointing seasons and a relegation
with Sunderland he was 31 years old
Leeds had never been a natural football
town in fact Leeds United only appeared
in the old First Division in 1924
several decades behind some of the
game's contemporary powers instead it
was a rugby Heartland with the Leeds
Club one of the founder members of the
breakaway northern Union the football
club that reavie joined had never won a
major honour saved that second division
title in 1924 at the start of the 1950's
home attendances had averaged over
32,000 ten years later with Leeds
suffering relegation in 1960 they'd
fallen to under 22,000 and was still on
the wane by 60 to the side were drifting
towards the bottom of Division two and
attracting on average just 13,000 340
fans to ellen road now in early 61
reavie took his first steps towards
coaching by applying for the vacant
player manager's job at Bournemouth
asking director Harry Reynolds a local
millionaire to write in the reference
with Bournemouth bulking over the
compensation fee Reynolds pause for
thought and with manager Jack Taylor
having recently resigned offered reavie
the player manager's job at Leeds the 33
reavie accepted a three-year contract
which we
pay him 20 pounds per week with an
inherited coaching staff of CID Owen
Morris Lindley and les caca who in turn
and in time would give revie's team its
legs and his mind so began one of the
most transformative periods in English
football history
reavie had been impressionable as a
player absorbing influences from his
careers beginning the role he played in
the 1956 Cup final a position we know
today as the false-9 was inspired by
nanda lee the GU tees performance at
Wembley in 1953 in Hungary's famous 6-3
win over England Real Madrid 73 win over
untracked Frankfurt in the 1960 European
Cup final would also become a definitive
reference point for evey and after
becoming Leeds manager he made footage
of the game compulsory viewing for any
young apprentice joining the club and of
course in the summer of 1961 replaced
the club's blue and gold kit with the
white shirts white shorts and white
socks that have been worn ever since to
some it was a transparent homage to Real
Madrid and a symbol of what reavie was
aiming towards according to other
reports however including the testimony
of Jack Charlton white was simply the
easiest colour to identify on the pitch
but whatever the truth it was indicative
of Leeds new ambition according to
descriptions in Anthony clavin's
Promised Land and northern love story
really mounted a full-scale assault on
the club's culture from day one he
inherited structural weaknesses a
decaying stadium rotting training
facilities and the lack of a natural
fanbase but perhaps his biggest obstacle
was an under motivated easily contented
squad and he would purge it ruthlessly
with 27 players jettisoned over the
first two years alone his innovations
also began immediately primitive
training methods were replaced by a new
technical focus while according to
Clemens account motivational tactics
were introduced with players who
performed particularly badly in training
rewarded with a yellow jersey to wear
during sessions and in an attempt to
foster team spirit squad trips to bingo
halls were organised three decades
before arson vanga would take charger
Arsenal and lead a conditioning
revolution reavie was also stressing the
importance of nutrition and diet
and monitoring what his players ate
before games he was challenging the
orthodoxy speaking years later and
quoted by James Corbett in a 2008
article for The Guardian midfielder
Peter Lorimer described an avant-garde
environment I know when we mixed with
players from other clubs and
internationals none of them were doing
the things that we were it was all new
everything was ahead of its time and
that's probably why we enjoyed it so
much above all else we had a strong
vision for what he wanted to create as a
club leads were on the breadline
constantly flirting with financial
catastrophe and as a result revi had few
options for improving his squad his
solution was to draw inspiration from
Matt Busby's work at Manchester United
and the organic supply which had
equipped a succession of excellent
homegrown sights Ravi wanted to
homogenize the style and tactics used by
Leeds various teams creating continuity
and easing the transition between junior
and senior football for aspiring
professionals the rewards from the newly
defined academy were bounteous reavie
inherited centre-half jack shelton and
future captain Billy Bremner but Barry's
break Peter Lorimer and Norman hunter
would all debut under him in 1962 as
would store what for back Paul Rini
future England internationals Paul
Madeley and Terry Cooper would follow in
63 and 64 respectively while Eddie gray
would graduate into the first team in
1966 with Terry Europe
joining him in 68 but many of these
changes exceeded anything tried by Busby
or anyone else really remains famous
today for his dossiers thick
excruciating ly detailed documents
tailored around the strengths and
weaknesses of opponents and the minutiae
of individual refereeing tendencies
there was nothing he wasn't willing to
try in pursuit of an advantage players
were given ballet lessons to improve
their balance really procured new light
weight training kitten boots and wearing
jackets and ties to and from games
became compulsory on match days
with the heart of realese legacy is that
under him a club was a family not just a
football team and he was their father
leader tactician and agony arm all
rolled into one he was committed to
ensuring that every employee was valued
and that a player's life beyond the
pitch was as settled as possible Reeve
he wanted his young players married
young and once they were their wives
would be invited to Club social nights
and her flowers sent to them on their
birthdays but progress on the pitch
wasn't initially as dramatic Leeds
limped to 14th at the end of revie's
first season in 61 and came within a
single win of relegation to Division
three in 62 by the end of 62 63
momentum had begun to build and
attendances had started to rise an
average of 20,000 376 pushed through the
turnstiles as Leeds finished fifth the
1963-64 side was a different beast
though they would win promotion back to
Division one but also begin the coloring
of revie's coaching reputation and it
began with a defensive switch with his
form in heavy recession Billy Bremner to
that point most often a white player was
repurposed as a central midfielder to
play alongside the tiny but devilish
Bobby Collins to fill the resulting
space reavie showed just how decisive
his judgment could be snatching the
transfer listed Johnny Giles from
Manchester United for just 33 thousand
pounds to accomplish promotion though
revered had to navigate the early season
loss of forward Jim's story to injury
which left the side reliant on its
wingers mainly the enigmatic ly gifted
Albert u hanussen for his goals Allen
peacock would be signed late in the
season but he too had proved brittle in
the long term left reavie dependent on a
much improved defence helmed by Charlton
in a hard running physical and
uncompromising style which would begin
the birth of the dirty Leeds legend
in the unforgiven Rob Bagchi argues
compellingly that they were a product of
their time and their environment that
they felt they had to fight their way
out of the second division relying on
organization set plays and closing down
space utilizing their superior fitness
to batter the opposition into submission
now further testimony came from Bill
Shankly no less you can't play your way
out of the second division he said
you've got to claw your way out
regarding the issue of whether leads
clorine crossed the line back she also
concludes that while there's little
evidence to support any theory that revi
encouraged roughhousing tactics neither
is there much to suggest that he
disapproved of them either
without question they were an extremely
physical side in a very physical age and
as the footage still available proves
played in a way which encouraged their
notoriety or as Peter Lorimer remembers
our whole ethos was built on loyalty we
all fight for each other we all work for
each other if someone kicks me he kicks
all 11 of us believes were built to not
suffer any intimidation and from 1964
onwards they began their struggle up the
mountain because of their industrial
roots and style reavie and his players
were looked down upon by the southern
media they earned few new first division
friends with an early brawl with Everton
at Goodison Park which ended with both
sets of players being temporarily taken
off the field they weren't a popular
sight and as a result the rest of
England enjoyed their near misses over
the coming years they were beaten by
Liverpool in the notoriously drab 65 FA
Cup final in 66 they finished second in
the first division while also losing at
the semi-final stage of the inter-cities
Fairs Cup the early incarnation of the
UEFA Cup and Europa League prior to the
second leg of that game against Real
Zaragoza reavie had tried to obtain an
advantage by asking the local fire
brigade to flood the Elland Road pitch
reasoning that the Spaniards would
struggle with boggy conditions but it
backfired
Leeds fell three goals behind inside 11
minutes and were eliminated
but it's the kind of anecdote which
portrayed how many viewed and continue
to view reavie as paranoid negative and
cynical a footballing pessimist someone
terrified to lose and the critical
losses continued often to the sound of
the country's mirth and the media's
cackling the schadenfreude er they would
be defeated in the FA Cup semi-final in
1967 and despite this time reaching the
Fairs Cup final they'd lose again over
two legs to Dinamo Zagreb realese
reputation for negativity and pragmatism
criticised again following the loss to
Zagreb formed one-half of a fascinating
contradiction on the one hand he was
detail orientated and clearly believed
in dispassionate cold analysis and on
the other he was a deeply superstitious
man who always wore the same blue suit
on matchday who built curious little
routines into his journeys to the ground
and once asked a gypsy woman from
Scarborough to carry out an exorcism of
Ellen Road in 1968 though shortly after
those spirits have been chased away
le's broke through in one of the Daoist
finals ever played at Wembley they be
Arsenal with a single Terry Cooper goal
to win the League Cup a few months later
in a final delayed into the following
September by fixture congestion and
political tension United completed their
journey in the fair's cup at last
capturing the trophy after typically a
one goal win over two legs against
Hungarian side farang Paris and in 1969
the Division One title finally followed
in true revi fashion it was a campaign
built on defensive rigidity Leeds kept
24 clean sheets in the league alone and
were confirmed as champions after
grinding out a goalless draw and field
against Liverpool but revie's Leeds were
play in several different acts the
reputation that holds to this day which
depicts them as a dour defensive
football team ignores their reinvention
after the turn of the decade it also
forgets that much of their success in
the late 1960s have been achieved
without a reliably available centre
forward and that's perhaps because
reavie was hesitant in the transfer
market
unlike Brian Clough with whom he remains
entwined he was a cautious spender
mcjones and Alan Clark was signed in 67
and 69 respectively but prior to that an
early theme had been the rotating cast
of imperfect or physically fragile
centre forwards what is often portrayed
as negativity from reavie cut by some be
interpreted as creative problem-solving
by the early 70s though leads have begun
to play with considerable ego and they
had the talent to do so with Bremner and
Giles who were tigerish and often
terrifying but also technically
brilliant with the swaggering
self-assured Clark upfront the tricky
elusive Eddie gray on the left and Peter
Lorimer launching his bombs from
distance authoring some of the finest
goals of the decade but still the
machine gun criticism from the press
bothered really a great deal as did his
team's tenuous relationship with their
towns public an Ellen Rhodes fluctuating
attendances in response and in
conjunction with Peter J villian the
famous illustrator then at the beginning
of his career really began a marketing
campaign of sorts it was strange and
gimmicky but memorable leads players
would kick plastic footballs into the
crowd before kickoff where their names
on their tracksuit tops and give away
their numbered sock tanks at full time
it was slightly clumsy and a bit forced
but it showed an openness to original
thinking or at least a willingness to
engage those who could think differently
on his behalf in 1971 the Aventis were
beaten as Leeds won the fair's cut for
the second time and in 72 reavie would
finally capture the FA Cup beating
Arsenal in the final with a team which
still included seven homegrown players
and they would return to the final in 73
only to lose dismal lead to second
division Sunderland Raveena's players
might have had a consolation in the Cup
Winners Cup final played two weeks later
but they would lose 1 nil to AC Milan in
a game riddled with scarcely believable
decisions
referee Christos MCUs who failed to
award three clear penalties was
subsequently condemned by an
investigation and banned from football
for life but they would still get their
curtain call in 1974 they would win
their second League title again
finishing ahead of shank Lee's Liverpool
and conceding just 13 goals away from
home in the process
and that would be revie's last season
with leads at the end of the 73 74
season he was appointed by the Football
Association to succeed Alf Ramsey as
England manager
tellingly the man who would replace him
Brian Clough would spend more on
transfers during his 44 days in charge
the 'really had in 13 years
but of course reavie will not be a
success
Milan castigate fundamentally leads
progress had been derived from creating
an internal culture and constructing a
sense of community around the club
neither of which was possible with
England at international level many of
his techniques the dossiers included
won't receive well England failed to
qualify for the 76 European Championship
and with their qualification for the 78
World Cup unlikely reavie announced in
the Daily Mail in July 1977 that he was
resigning his position to coach of all
sides the UAE national team now the FA
were livid the public were incredulous
and the press were absolutely vicious
reavie was denounced in the strongest
possible terms as a traitor and a
turncoat and with his decision described
as an act of treason it was not however
an unambiguous situation the FA
reportedly had been preparing to sack
him anyway with an approach supposedly
already made to Bobby Robson
additionally while Reva cited the
pressures of the job and intrusion on
his family's personal life as being
behind his decision there remains
conjecture that he had decided to leave
the country as rumours about his
managerial practices were reaching
critical mass now none of those stories
have ever been proven but neither have
they been properly dismissed in 1978
former goalkeeper Gary spark made
allegations of match-fixing as part of
an investigation by the Daily Mirror it
now should be noted that spark made his
accusations in return for a very large
fee but he claimed that reavie had
repeatedly tried to bribe opposition
players and fix matches no charges were
ever filed against reavie and spray
could become a pariah with his former
teammates for the rest of his life but
he maintained that version of events
until he passed away in 2016
reavie himself would never return to
working in England following three years
in the UAE he would spend his final five
years in management in the Middle East
with al nasir in Dubai and Ali in Egypt
before retiring to Scotland in 1989
after a two-year battle with motor
neuron disease Don Revie died at the age
of just 61 and in 1994 the North Stand
the Allen Road was renamed in his honor
while in 2012 a statue of reavie was
unveiled outside the ground today it's a
symbol of everything he achieved with
Leeds United and the status he endowed
upon them his legacy however remains a
fierce debating point in English
football history an innovator or a cynic
a messiah or a heretic fiercely loyal or
enslaved to ambitions of wealth reavie
is one of the most opaque figures that
the game has ever known
[Music]
you